[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The
actress, Suzanne Summers,
took the subject of
natural hormone replacement
main stream, a
subject near and dear
to those who suffered the
symptoms of menopause.
In truth, it's a
household problem.
Not only do women
find themselves out
of balance hormonally, so
do men and even children.
Laura Thompson is a
naturopathic endocrinologist,
who specializes in helping
the whole family get
their wits about them
through natural hormone
therapies and food.
She joins us today to give
us some very useful guidance
in regaining our sunny
dispositions individually
and as a family.
Welcome to the show.
I'm sure a high
percentage of the viewers
right now want to
know what you have
to say because,
if not themselves,
we've all suffered through a lot
of these kinds of dysfunctions
that happen as a result,
honestly, of our own behaviors,
and what we've
done to ourselves.
I mean, haven't we
pretty much trashed
our own immune systems,
hormonal systems,
endocrine systems
through trying to live
the kind of out of balance
life that we live in the west?
>>LAURA THOMPSON:
That's so true.
It actually all comes down to
stress and the various list
of stressors that we have
in our lives, anything
from missing a meal,
to traumatic stress,
to overwhelm, to lots of work,
I mean, dietary stressors,
radiation, environmental
stressors, I mean,
the list goes on and on.
And all of those affect
the hormone balance.
>>REGINA: I was going to ask
you just while we're on it,
you just listed off-- you
ticked off several things that
are impacted by stress.
Does-- the ways in which
our bodies are impacted.
Is wireless technologies,
a lot of these kind
of unseen RF frequencies,
and EMF frequencies,
do they also lend
to that portrait.
>>THOMPSON: I was thinking
about this the other day,
because the whole idea about
stress is can you adapt
or can't you?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>THOMPSON: And what
occurs hormonally
in that whole transition
toward adaptation.
And I was thinking,
OK, we're dealing
with a lot of wireless
radiation, and how is--
I mean, this stuff is going in
and out and through our bodies,
how is that-- how is that
impacting our nervous system?
How is it impacting our brains?
It is, and it could
be hyper stimulating.
It could be affecting
our neurotransmitters.
>>REGINA: Among all these
stressors you're talking about,
another one that
occurs to me that
is kind of silent and
invisible, is that of radiation.
Not just radiation,
but frequencies,
such as radio frequencies,
EMFs, and so forth.
And we know studies
have been done
in the US, a lot of
them out of Australia
as well, where there have been
hubs with lots of wireless
and business environments,
for example, are at home,
there is a cluster
of tumors that
will grow in the people
in that-- especially
breast tumors.
I mean, so what's
it doing to us?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah, it's
severely impacting
our nervous systems,
our immune systems,
creating hypersensitivities,
and most likely
suppressing immune function,
and how the body actually
responds to other
things that are supposed
to be dealing with, but it's
not because the radiation is
affecting it.
But my positive take on it all,
is that we're going to adapt.
>>REGINA: Right, that's
what I was going to ask you.
>>THOMPSON: We're
going to adapt.
And that's why our adrenal
glands are in our bodies,
because that's their job.
And we may not be
there yet, but you
know we're always ever
advancing, and will adapt.
>>REGINA: And that's really
interesting because even with
Fukushima and some really
severe cases where we're looking
at having to adapt to
large amounts of radiation,
people have had--
some people adapted fine.
Even with Hiroshima
in World War II,
there are people that
lived through that
and adapted just fine to those
high levels of radiation.
>>THOMPSON: I think
some of that comes
down to just what kind
of a detoxifier are you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>THOMPSON: What are your
detoxification abilities,
and how strong is the gut
in being able to actually
stay sealed, and not allow
things into the system,
and how great are your
eliminative organs,
the bowel, the
kidneys, the lymph
in being able to eliminate the
stuff that comes into contact?
>>REGINA: Right, and we're
going to go into the guts
in a little bit in some
detail, because there's
a cycle I'm really fascinated
with that you specialize in.
But before we get
into that cycle,
I wanted to talk a
little bit more--
you brought up the
adrenals, it seems
like everyone I interview, all
paths, especially clinicians,
all paths seem to lead
back to the adrenals.
Why is that?
>>THOMPSON: Well, they're
our intermediaries.
They are the connectors between
your external environment
and your internal environment.
And they and the
brain work together
in helping us live in this
world, whatever that might be.
Might be dealing with a
sick house syndrome, mold,
something somebody
just said to you.
Maybe somebody is quickly
running down the hall right now
and I jump.
How do I-- how do
I react to that?
My adrenal glands, my
brain are working together
to help me create a balancing
act with it all or not.
And all of that leads to this
incredible hormonal cascade,
which then tips off all the
different hormones in the body,
not the least of which
is the sex hormones.
But those adrenal glands
play such a huge role
in how pretty much
everything else happens.
>>REGINA: And so,
we're essentially
on adrenal overload
as a society,
or adrenal depletion,
whatever you want to call it.
I mean both, I suppose, because
we're choosing to live a life.
I mean, just the mere fact that
we're in the information age
really has changed the way
in which our adrenals have
to function.
I've forgotten the--
I've forgotten the
statistics exactly,
but it's something
like our minds
are having to take in
50,000 times more data
than they had to a
100 years ago just
through all the forms
of media that we're
surrounded with on a
day in, day out basis.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That's a lot of input.
We weren't designed for that.
>>THOMPSON: Well,
we weren't, but I
think we're designing ourselves
for that, in that direction.
We have to.
I mean, that's the
great thing about man.
We can change.
And we can create newness.
But we have to
have strong organs.
And we have to-- and in
regards to the adrenals,
we have to really protect
them, and support them, and not
disregard them,
and cast them aside
with alcohol, with
caffeine, with white sugar,
and with chemicals, and
all the processed foods.
We can't do that stuff.
I mean, yeah, a
party here or there.
We can't carry on
like that every day.
We have to really honor
the fact that these glands,
and the brain, need
nutrients, and need
to be able to
function well in order
to do what you want
to do, which is
to lead a passion, joyful life.
>>REGINA: Right.
And in Eastern medicine,
the glands and the organs
are honored.
I mean, it's not uncommon
to talk about your liver,
for example, or your kidneys.
In this culture,
unless you've just
been in for lab
tests or something,
we don't tend to
think about what's
encased behind skin and bones.
But that is-- if we were looking
at it as an entity of its own,
which they are.
The organs are.
If you look at it from more
of an esoteric point of view,
they're very much
their own entities
with their own mind, their
own information systems
and means of communicating.
How would you
characterize the adrenals
as an independent member
of your community?
[LAUGHTER]
>>THOMPSON: Well, they're
the glands of boldness,
and courage, and strength.
They can also be, though,
the glands of fear,
and self degradation,
and depression.
But, hopefully, we're a
happy mix of all that.
And, again, we have
to honor the fact
that they do need
nutrients, and they do need
mental emotional balancing--
>>REGINA: Care
and consideration,
just like we do as a whole.
Let's talk about some
of the hormones that
are depleted when we get into
more of the self-deprecating
and fear end of the use
of our educational glands,
and they start becoming
out of balance.
What is the cascade effect
in the sex hormones?
>>THOMPSON: Well, you see, the
important thing to remember
is that all hormones
start with cholesterol.
And, in other words, the
steroid hormones-- steroids
means from fat or from lipid.
And so, cholesterol
is the building block.
And from there, you go in
to pregnenolone, and then
progesterone, and I won't go
through the whole pathway,
but suffice it to say that
the adrenal glands make
the adrenal hormones, the
stress hormones, cortisol, DHA,
and adrenaline, and
such, but they also
make the sex hormones.
And one of the problems
that occurs, especially
after a person has
years of stress,
is that their adrenal glands
get taxed, tapped out,
and then they're less able to
be the backup system for the sex
hormone production,
which we sorely rely on
in middle age, when the sex
hormones begin to decline,
estrogen, progesterone, and
testosterone begin to decline,
and the body wants the
adrenal glands to kick in.
And the adrenal glands say,
hey, what are you kidding?
>>REGINA: I'm worn out.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
You're not getting
anything from me.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>THOMPSON: You got
to treat me right.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
Well, you can say that the horse
has already bolted on that one
if you've been treating your
body in a rough fashion all
those years.
How does that impact--
you're talking
about what happens
when we go through our
middle years and menopause,
but what happens in
the younger years,
let's say for women
and men, actually both,
when it comes to fertility?
>>THOMPSON: Oh boy.
So sad, today, the
fertility issues.
Well, I think that we're
dealing with a severe fertility
problems because of the
environmental chemicals,
which have an estrogen
effect in the body, which
affects both boys and girls,
teens and young adults.
And we also have
hormone replacements
and in the birth control pill.
>>REGINA: Right
>>THOMPSON: And we have
steroid use among teenage boys,
and young adult men, athletes.
And all of these affect
the hormone balance,
and all of these can throw
off the sex hormones.
And so, I think
that the fertility
issue is it can be not only
affected, but can be remedied.
But all of these other--
all these aggravators
have to be handled.
And like, for instance, when I
get a girl that comes into me,
and she's coming to deal
with her blood sugar
problems, or her
depression, or her PMS,
and her parents
wanted to see me.
And, of course, she's most the
time on the birth control pill.
I always do my due
diligence to talk to them
about why they shouldn't
be on birth control pill.
And the what occurs is, that
most of the time I'm able to, I
guess, get the fear into
them enough where they're--
>>REGINA: And so what?
So, let's say you're
the mother of a teenage,
or you're a teenage girl
watching this right now.
What's the lecture,
you would deliver
regarding birth control?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah,
so I would say, do--
the birth control
pill is basically
controlling the hormone system.
It's basically telling
the body you're pregnant.
And then, you stay on the
pill for 10 years, 15 years,
20 years, and then you decide
you want to get pregnant,
and you go off the pill,
but the body's already
been pregnant in a sense.
In other words, the
feedback system--
>>REGINA: Repeatedly.
>>THOMPSON: Is telling you
that it's in a certain state.
And then, all of a sudden
you want it to perform and it
can't.
On top of all that, you get all
the toxins from the estrogen
and progesterone residues
from the birth control pill,
and the toxification
of the liver,
and all kinds of other
issues that occur when
the body has chemical control.
>>REGINA: So, essentially,
you'd recommend
non-chemical, non-oral
forms of contraceptives
of pretty much any kind, but
just don't take the pill.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah, go back
to the old fashioned ways
of doing things, condom and
you know just self-control.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And I think with
a lot of people,
they just don't want the
inconvenience of not knowing,
for example, when their
period's going to show up
in the case of
girls, and it just
seems like an easy conventional
way to do things now.
>>THOMPSON: OK, so
this is what I say,
because this is what I hear,
the cramps, and the mood swings,
and the inconvenience.
Well, so what?
You're a girl.
You're a woman.
Deal with.
However, the reason we
have symptoms like that
is because we have
hormone imbalance.
So we can get the
hormones in balance.
And a lot of people, once
their hormones are in balance,
they don't have symptoms.
They go through the period
without pretty much blinking
an eye.
>>REGINA: OK, so
give us an example.
So you have a girl who
is suffering from cramps
and all these things you just
mentioned that are painful,
unpleasant, just make life
miserable for a couple of days,
what would you do to
that girl to balance
her hormones without
her taking anything
like an oral contraceptive?
What would your approach be?
>>THOMPSON: I always go
back to the baseline,
which is your food.
OK, what the information
you can give someone
about the food,
and the information
that they glean from their
body from eating certain foods
or not, it's going
to last a lifetime.
And so, what I talk about
is, pretty much largely
blood sugar.
How to keep the blood
sugar in balance,
because when the blood
sugar is out of balance,
and a lot of people
are hypoglycemic, which
means the blood
sugar gets low, well,
that sets up off a
whole cascade of events,
not the least of which is
mood swings, bitchiness.
>>REGINA: Yes, and that
is not-- that does not
relate just to women.
That's men as well.
>>THOMPSON: Of course.
>>REGINA: I had a camera man,
one of my favorite cameramen
ever, we're out in the
field doing a documentary
and, oh boy, come three or
4 o'clock in the afternoon,
everyone knew we needed to
turn the lights on and scream
through the mountains to find a
coffee shop and something sweet
because he was so awful to
contend with after that.
Worst than any woman I knew
on PMS that had PMS going.
And so, this, do you do the
same-- would it be the same--
I mean, obviously, the same
recommendation for men, women,
children.
This is just straight across
advice, balancing blood sugar.
>>THOMPSON: You have
to have a human body.
This is what you do.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>THOMPSON: It's just that
I think with the women,
things seem more dramatic.
>>REGINA: Is it because
women are more expressive?
>>THOMPSON: And more dramatic.
>>REGINA: And more
dramatic, exactly.
I mean, just chatting
about it more
where a guy may be
feeling miserable too,
but he's not necessarily
going to bring it up
at breakfast, right?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah, And
I think women also--
I mean, the truth
of the matter is,
there are cycles that
women go through.
And men go through cycles too,
but they're a lot more subtle.
And so anyway, getting
the food in order
and helping a young girl
eat five small meals a day--
and a lot of times,
their schedules
are conducive to that,
especially if they're athletes.
And they just take
little snacks with them.
And then it's really a question
of doing the hormone testing.
>>REGINA: Right.
And we're going to get
to that in just a minute.
But what often happens
for people in their teens,
and once you have some wheels
and a little bit of freedom,
is you head to a place
like Starbucks, right?
And so you would take
that afternoon snack
and turn it into maybe a
triple venti vanilla latte.
And now you've got
caffeine in on it.
You have simple refined
sugars in on it.
What is that further doing to a
girl or a woman at this point?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah,
you're creating a yo-yo.
And you're basically
stepping in for the adrenals.
Anything that's a stimulant
like sugar or caffeine
is going to step in
and say, hey, I'm here.
I'm the stimulant.
We don't need new
adrenals right now.
And basically, the
body eventually
starts to rely on that, because
the body's own resources for it
have been cast aside.
And thus, the cravings
ensue, and the habits form.
But, you know, not to say
that all of these things
need to be eliminated
100%, because you know
that's not going to happen.
We're human beings.
We're created--
>>REGINA: We just can't
live that lifestyle.
We can't do it as a daily--
>>THOMPSON: Lifestyle
is a good word.
>>REGINA: As a lifestyle.
Let's talk about-- you were
just talking about cravings.
Let's talk about sex.
What happens with people
once you start really
spending the adrenals
and you start going out
of balance hormonally?
We look at the birth rate
of various countries,
and a lot of it has
to do with choices,
birth control, finances,
economics, and so forth.
But what's actually happening
to the modern person
as a result of these
stressors and their sex drive?
You see a lot of people
coming through your office.
What's happening to us?
>>THOMPSON: Well, I see it
going both ways, you know?
I see the low, and
I see the high.
And I'm talking about the low
for men too, not just women.
But I also work with people
who have sexual addictions.
And this is where we really
see the adrenal and the brain
connection, the
neurotransmitters of the brain,
the brain chemicals
that interact
with the adrenal glands and are
affected by various stressors
that we mentioned before.
And again, a whole
cascade of events
occurs with the brain chemicals.
But when the adrenal
glands are depleted,
what that means is that the
body then cannot accurately,
effectively deal with stressors.
And therefore, the brain is
triggered in certain ways
to help sort of
balance things out.
And then the neurotransmitters
can either be deficient
or can be excreted
in high amounts.
And one of them--
dopamine, for instance--
is known when it's low to
actually cause a person
to want to feel stimulated.
In other words,
caffeine can give you
that jolt that if you
don't have dopamine,
you'll feel some sort of
satisfaction or motivation.
The same with--
this is what I find
with people with sex
addictions is a lot of times,
their dopamine levels are low.
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
Interesting.
>>THOMPSON: And
therefore, the body's
going to try and do something
to get it to go up so that it
gets that sense of motivation.
>>REGINA: OK.
And what about in the case where
your sexual desire is very low,
which you hear that a lot?
A lot that is age--
seems to be age-related
as well, of course.
But what about en
masse, I mean, even
among young people who normally
are kind of in those more
juicy years of
childbearing and such,
but there's just no desire?
What's happening there?
>>THOMPSON: I had
a 16-year-old boy
in my office a
couple of weeks ago
saying that his libido is low.
He asked his mom to
go out of the room,
and says that his libido is low.
And I said, what
do you need it for?
No, I'm just kidding.
>>REGINA: I know.
Come on.
>>THOMPSON: No, he knew
his libido was low.
He didn't have that
thing that guys have.
And so I said,
well, it's probably
because your hormones are low.
So what we're
looking at here are
a variety of, in
the case of a guy,
potential low testosterone.
One of the things that we
look at with boys and men
is the ratio between
testosterone and estrogens,
because nowadays with all
the estrogens in the dairy
products and the environment--
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask you.
What if your household
is vegetarian,
and you're living on
also maybe a lot of soy
that has a high
estrogen content?
What is that doing to the males?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah, so it's
taking up the estrogen receptor
sites in the body.
It can be causing some
liver ineffectiveness.
And the liver is very important
for the production of hormones.
The word that's used is
conjugation of hormones.
And so all of these foods
and environmental factors
are upsetting the apple cart.
And what we have to do is
we have to analyze the diet,
see what needs to come out, and
help the liver and the gut work
more effectively, and then do
the normal hormone balancing
that we do.
>>REGINA: It's
interesting because you
look at a lot of
third-world cultures
where you have birth rates of
up to seven to nine children,
even.
But then again, you're looking
at people who oftentimes
live very close to the land.
They're not interfacing
with a lot of technology
if any technology at all.
They're eating diets that
are much closer to the land
and not processed.
Basically, what I'm
saying is these women
tend to be a lot closer
to nature in every way
than we are.
Is this what you
think is responsible
for these further high
fertility rates compared to us?
>>THOMPSON: I think
that's part of it.
And I think also, the way
that women live today with
their very high testosterone
output because they're doing
a lot of work, and they're
trying to maintain households,
and they're doing man-woman
jobs at the same time--
I think that's affecting the
balance of the sex hormones,
and it's also affecting
the adrenal glands, which,
as I said before, are
not then available to be
the backup system.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
OK.
Well, we're going to talk about
the guts in just a moment.
We're going to take a little
break because the guts are
really key here.
We'll be right back.
OK.
We're back, and
we're going to start
talking about our digestive
function and how all of that
plays into it, particularly
with serotonin.
And we haven't talked
about serotonin yet,
but that's that nice,
soft, feel-good thing.
That's why when we're
upset, we go and eat a donut
and want a cup of
hot chocolate--
all because our brain is craving
some production of serotonin
to make us feel better.
How does this play into
the hormonal portrait?
Because we don't seem
to be running off
of serotonin as a lot.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
So when we have stress,
it depletes serotonin,
and it affects so many
events in the body that can
cause a decrease in serotonin.
But the whole thing
with the dietary issues
and all of the
inflammatory problems
that occur in the gut
between the gluten
and the wheat and the
casein and the dairy
products and the sugar and the
alcohol and the inflammation
that the body incurs is one
of the destroying factors
of serotonin.
So there is a huge dietary
influence on whether or not
serotonin is produced.
90% to 95% of
serotonin is produced
in the enteric nervous
system, in the gut
and the intestinal tract.
>>REGINA: So what does that say?
Say now, you've eaten
so much of that stuff.
We're allergic to
a lot of things,
like you just said, a
lot of food allergies.
If we were originally
eating grains in order
to help in the
production of serotonin,
what happens now with people who
can't even eat grains anymore
and can't eat a lot
of the foods that
normally would have
easily inspired
the production of serotonin?
>>THOMPSON: Well, it
comes down to how--
serotonin is made
from amino acids.
Amino acids are from protein.
So it really comes down
to how is your body
actually digesting and absorbing
the protein that you're eating.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>THOMPSON: And what kind
of proteins are you eating?
Are they able to then
become serotonin?
So yeah, I mean, it
doesn't necessarily
have to do with the carbs.
I mean, the carbohydrate--
>>REGINA: Why do we grab--
why do we reach for carbs?
>>THOMPSON: Well,
it's-- yeah, I mean,
it's sort of our intuitive
nature of what's going to get
me there the quickest, which is
not necessarily always the best
way.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>THOMPSON: But
the carb situation
is such that if you eat
complex carbohydrates, which
are the better ones, the brown
rice and that type of thing,
then the body is going to
utilize the carbohydrates
and break down in
a slower manner
so that the body
gets more even fuel.
I wouldn't necessarily
say that one
should bank on carbohydrates
to produce serotonin
because if you do, you're
basically looking at a roller
coaster effect, which could be
fun in a short period of time.
>>REGINA: Yeah, if you want to
go manic and then be depressed.
Great for manic depression.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
But basically, that's
not really a way
to have consistent happiness.
>>REGINA: Right.
So you're saying really,
it's down to the quality,
regardless of our
dietary restrictions,
whether we're a raw foodist, a
vegan, a vegetarian, a lacto,
ovo, whatever, or paleo,
on a paleo diet of mostly
vegetables and proteins.
We have to find a
consistent source of protein
that works well for our bodies.
>>THOMPSON: Exactly, right.
It's those proteins
that actually break down
to the various amino acids.
You know, I have this
discussion with--
I see a lot of people who
are on antidepressant meds.
And I see a lot of people
who are on anti-anxiety meds
and sleep medications.
And so most of time,
they're coming to me
because they want
to get off of them.
And I say, OK, I can't take
you off your medication.
That's not my role.
My role is to help your
body get to the point
where you don't
need them anymore.
But a lot of people
are brainwashed
into thinking that
they can never
get off their
medications because this
is what they're told.
And they're told this because
the people who are telling them
this, they're
psychiatrists, and whoever
is prescribing for them--
>>REGINA: Someone
in a white coat.
>>THOMPSON: They don't know.
They don't know that the
brain chemicals are only
made from nutrients.
The brain chemicals
are made from minerals
and amino acids and vitamin
C. And these nutrients,
they follow a particular cascade
with certain enzyme reactions
in the body and liver
function that all
make the right thing happen.
And eventually, the pathway
of minerals and nutrients
and amino acids becomes
the final product,
which is the neurotransmitter.
So if a person is getting
nourished properly
and the gut is set up to be able
to absorb your food properly,
then the potential is
that you can actually
manufacture these
chemicals on your own,
which is the way it should be.
This is how we were designed.
>>REGINA: So what
if the food source
is denuded of any
natural minerals?
I mean, we know
that even if you're
talking about fresh
produce, unless it's
raised in a very
conscious way, which
used to be just the normal
way, a lot of the minerals
are now missing from the diet.
So how do we start
replenishing the minerals,
remineralize our body?
Do you have some
suggestions for us, even
by way of supplementation
of reliable minerals
to start kicking
this process back
in so we can create our own
proper hormone spectrum?
>>THOMPSON: Well, first
of all, as you mentioned,
using organic produce,
vegetables, and fruits,
you're going to be getting a
highly mineralized soil, which
is going to pass it on to
the plant, and then the food,
and then into your body.
So I mean, many studies have
looked at organic produce
and shown that they are
much higher in nutrients.
So that's one.
I utilize lots of different
products in my practice.
I love the old coral
calcium minerals.
They are so pH balanced, and
the body just takes them up,
just sort of takes it right in.
That happens to be one
of my favorite products.
>>REGINA: Coral calcium, OK.
And what about CALM?
A lot of people see this
on the shelf on sale
and such at the store, a
magnesium citrate product.
Is that good?
>>THOMPSON: It has a
nice Band-Aid effect.
I don't see it having
an everlasting effect.
So I'm looking for--
I like to use things that
work, that really work,
so that eventually, maybe
you don't need them anymore.
>>REGINA: Right.
So you're talking about
something that was developed
over eons of time in the sea.
And taking that in,
our body recognizes it
because it's in its natural
form, the coral calcium
that you're talking about.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, that's a good one.
Now let's go back to
the subject of serotonin
specifically, just
focusing on that.
What are some other ways,
besides balancing our proteins
out--
and here we've just
talked a little bit
about the coral calcium.
What are some
other ways to start
boosting our serotonin levels?
I mean, it seems critical.
We have to do that for
everything else to work, right?
>>THOMPSON: I think that
people finding whatever
it is that gets them to
what I call their center,
whether that be through
prayer or meditation or yoga
or just sitting calmly, reading,
you know, whatever it is.
That is going to enhance
serotonin production.
I mean, in my mind, you could
do everything with your mind.
It really helps to have the
body functioning effectively
to help the mind get
there more easily.
A ton of my patients
have said to me
after working on hormone
balancing and brain
neurochemistry that they can
meditate more easily, that they
can focus better,
that they can actually
get to a more peaceful place
because they don't have
all the physical symptoms
and the interruptions
that they had when they
weren't feeling as well.
>>REGINA: That's interesting.
Now, going back
to that link again
in the disruption of the
digestive and elimination
system, what happens if
your system isn't working
very well anymore, and you
start throwing laxatives at it?
What happens there in terms
of the production of serotonin
then and the release of
serotonin in the body
once you get to that
point in your elimination?
>>THOMPSON: Well, a
laxative is just creating
a sort of superficial effect.
And really, lots of residues
result. I mean, in other words,
things don't actually get
out of the body when--
>>REGINA: As a
result of using them.
Talk about that a little bit.
What gets left behind?
We think we're-- a lot of
people are really addicted
to cleansing and stuff and
really throwing a lot of stuff
at that.
What's the downside of
that aggressive kind
of cleansing from
the outside rather
than inside biologically?
>>THOMPSON: Well,
OK, I guess I just
want to make a distinction
between laxatives
and cleansing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I'm
kind of throwing
the two in the same basket.
Let's just talk laxatives and
not your annual cleansing,
your spring
housecleaning, as it were.
>>THOMPSON: Well, the laxatives
are just artificially softening
the stool, pretty much.
And you know, there are lots
of residues that are left in--
you can talk to
colon therapists,
and they can tell you--
residues that are left
lining the intestines, which
are basically fodder
for infections.
>>REGINA: And
malabsorption of nutrients?
>>THOMPSON: Of course.
I mean, you never want to
take laxatives and expect
that you're not going to
have mineral or vitamin
malabsorption.
You always want to
take extra nutrients
when you're taking
that laxatives,
because they're going to--
they're just going to
help your body eliminate
indiscriminately.
>>REGINA: Right.
So does that feed
into leaky gut at all?
>>THOMPSON: Well, does
it feed into leaky gut?
Well, I mean, it could.
It could, but it
doesn't have to.
>>REGINA: I'm saying if you've
got all this stuff sticking
around the lining of the
intestines, for example.
I mean, are you setting yourself
up for something chronic?
>>THOMPSON: You could be.
You could be, yeah.
Because eventually,
over time, the way I
usually explain it if
something is irritating--
or say you're rubbing your
finger on a piece of paper day
after day, week after
week, month after month.
Eventually, you're going
to rub a hole in the paper.
And for things
that are irritating
the intestinal lining, which
could be anything from gluten
to infections, staph,
parasites, yeast, eventually,
what's going to
happen is there are
going to be little tears
in the intestinal tract,
and then stuff is going to
leak into the bloodstream
before it's supposed to--
protein, molecules, et cetera.
And then the body will attack.
This is really why we have a
lot of autoimmune problems.
>>REGINA: Autoimmune.
Right, autoimmune.
OK.
So going back to where we were,
this whole notion of serotonin
and the production of
the feel-good chemicals
which allow us to
relax and destress,
and if we can
destress, then we're
creating the right cascade,
I assume, of sex hormones
as well.
What about-- you talked about
the meditation a little bit
ago, but this razor's edge that
has to do with fun and pleasure
and passion in life?
How important is it that we
experience these feelings
in terms of the kinds of
chemicals they create?
And explain what
chemicals they do create
and how they affect us.
>>THOMPSON: Well, I mean,
fun and pleasure, of course.
>>REGINA: I'm just asking you
from a chemical point of view,
you know?
>>THOMPSON: Well, I think it
depends on what is causing--
you know, I mean,
is it really fun?
I tell you, I did--
>>REGINA: That's why I'm asking.
It's a razor's edge.
Sometimes it's just seeking
some kind of intense experience
that isn't necessarily
what we would call fun.
Yeah.
>>THOMPSON: I did--
this is on topic,
but it might start sounding
like it's a little off topic.
>>REGINA: Go ahead.
>>THOMPSON: I did a great
experiment with myself
when I went into menopause
about 12 years ago.
I had horrendous hot
flashes, 50 to 60 a day,
I mean, sometimes full body
sweats, horrible-- two,
three showers a day, waking
up 10 times at night,
really not even wanting to
go anywhere near the bedroom
because I started associating
it with horrendous discomfort.
Anyway, I started to analyze
my hot flashes, because I mean,
I'm a hormone expert.
So I can't be sitting
there having hot flashes.
And yeah, I've worked
on myself, and I
let other people work on
me, because that's really--
physician, heal thyself, right?
And I started analyzing
by thinking back.
OK, what just happened
10 seconds ago?
What brought this hot flash on?
Was it the iced
tea I just drank?
Yes.
Was it what somebody just said?
And I started analyzing
how my reactions were
to certain people.
There would invariably be a
patient or two or a person
that I knew that would come
and sit down in front of me,
and my face would
start dripping sweat.
And I think, what is it
about this person that I'm
getting stressed out
about, whether it be fear
or whatever emotion
was coming over me?
And I started to see that even
joy could create a hot flash.
A hot flash is basically
the manifestation
of a stressor, a
stress reaction.
And so I started seeing
all of these stimulants,
and I began to realize
that it wasn't just
a hormone imbalance.
It was the brain.
It was what was
happening emotionally,
what was happening
brain chemical-wise.
And that's when
I started getting
into neurotransmitter work.
And when I began to
work on my serotonin--
because my serotonin
was in the pits.
I started working
on serotonin levels.
And again, I don't like
to think of working
on anything biochemically
as a single action.
It's all about a balancing act.
It's all about the feedback
loop in the body, what
responds to what.
It's all about the
ratios of serotonin
to dopamine, for instance.
My hot flashes
started disappearing.
And I was an insomniac.
My sleep started improving.
Duh.
And I really had to
go that extra route
and go beyond just the
hormone approach to working
with the brain chemistry.
Because for me, it was
more about emotions,
emotional stressors.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
And also, I remember reading a
study a few years back talking
about women in the Western
culture in particular--
and I don't know if it was
isolated to the US or Western
culture--
that traditionally,
our levels of serotonin
are lower than that of males.
And I don't know if you
found the same thing.
>>THOMPSON: That's true.
>>REGINA: And that
also, the balance
of the alpha state
within our brains
is something that is also
lower than with males.
So this seems to be this
thing you're talking about,
this kind of mild depression,
having your emotions stressed
more easily than a men,
for example, is very real
on a chemical level.
And so it sounds like you
have to go to extra trouble
to boost those levels in order
to get more up to a mainline.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Than a
man would have to.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah,
I think part of it
is because women experience
more emotional stress.
I don't know.
That might not even be right.
That might just be
a woman saying that.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
That's why I was just
keeping it to brain chemicals
and talking about
the alpha state.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
So I think that women have
to pay particular attention
to really getting spiritually or
emotionally, mentally balanced
and keeping their guts strong.
Really, really
important, because I
think women are
also more sort of
attracted to the craving foods
and the coffee, the chocolate
at 4:00 PM, that type of thing.
And that's not going to do it.
That's just the Band-Aid.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK.
Now, you brought
this up earlier,
and it's time to talk about it.
So if a person is thinking,
oh, I'm kind of like that.
I'm not happy a lot of the time.
I just-- I don't know
what to do about it.
It almost seems
chemical, and they're
having these thoughts
or feelings right now.
And you want to start
looking at it more seriously
and evaluating it.
You have to do some
kind of testing.
Now, if you go to
your HMO, they'll
take a vial of blood or two.
>>THOMPSON: Or not.
>>REGINA: Or not, or not.
If they take a vial of blood
or two, what's going on there?
And then talk about,
in your opinion,
what the preferred
manner of testing is.
>>THOMPSON: Ideally,
I like for people
to do both the saliva
hormone testing as well
as the urinary
neurotransmitter testing.
I mean, that would be ideal.
And the only reason that some
people don't is because it
gets costly to do everything.
The salivary testing I find
a lot more impactful to use
for a treatment
plan than bloodwork,
mainly because the blood test--
first of all, it's a shot--
it's a shot in the dark.
>>REGINA: Why is--
>>THOMPSON: Testing the blood--
>>REGINA: Is that because
it's just that minute
versus over 24 hours?
>>THOMPSON: Well, yeah, because
the adrenal glands basically
rule the 24-hour clock.
And so you really need to be
testing the adrenal hormones
over a 24-hour period,
which you can't do at a lab.
>>REGINA: Well, what if you
were nearly in an accident
before you arrived at
the lab, and you've
had some kind of adrenal
response to that?
You're going to get a
skewed reading even there.
>>THOMPSON: That's true.
>>REGINA: Or being
afraid of a needle, even.
Right?
>>THOMPSON: Right, that's true.
Yeah.
So the bloodwork is helpful.
I always like to see them back
to back with the saliva test.
But if I had my choice, I would
have the 24-hour cortisol panel
and the DHEA panel, the two
adrenal stress hormones,
and the estrogen,
progesterone, and testosterone
done through the saliva.
I mean, it's done in the
convenience of your home
because it's just a saliva
collection that you do at home.
So it's very simple.
It's very simple to perform.
And then a treatment plan
is made from the test.
And my focus is to help people,
obviously, feel better and be
symptom free, but
really, more than that,
my focus is to help
people not need anything,
to get them to the point
where-- and it takes a while,
because everybody has
a different timeline.
It's certainly not going
to be a couple of weeks.
For most people, ti's going to
be about 18 months, actually.
>>REGINA: Oh, really?
Before they start seeing
long-term effects?
>>THOMPSON: They'll start
feeling better more quickly.
But I mean, you know,
when you're done,
it usually takes a lot longer.
But you know, I like to
use the dietary approach.
That's really important.
Like I said before,
when people walk away
and they're done with you, then
that's what they're left with.
And then they know how to
treat themselves with food.
And then I utilize certain
customized adrenal and female
and male hormone precursor
creams, liposomal creams,
that are made specifically.
These are nonprescription,
by the way.
These are not compounded--
pharmacy compounded products.
>>REGINA: Oh, I was
wondering about that,
because another route
that a lot of people
take after they do their
panels is some practitioners
or doctors or OBGYNs
will have people
go on either
pharmaceutical hormones,
or they have them
go on bioidenticals.
But one thing I've noticed
about the bioidenticals that
are compounded is if you're not
under some pretty strict care
in terms of being
tested regularly,
you can throw your
hormones way out of balance
quickly with bioidenticals, just
like pharmaceuticals, right?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
I mean, a bioidentical
choice is a better
choice than the
pharmaceuticals, obviously,
because it's better
quality, and it matches
more what the body is making.
And if you take synthetic
estrogens, like Premarin,
for instance, you've got 23
different estrogens that are
available in the horse urine.
And the woman's body
has three estrogens.
So what happens to the other 20?
This is one of the reasons
there are so many, I think,
hormonal cancers.
But anyway--
>>REGINA: So if you're
going to do one of the two,
the bioidenticals
are a better choice.
And that's what Suzanne
Somers and all her work
was about is that.
But I also know women who've
gotten in trouble with them.
>>THOMPSON: Yes, because
they do have a tendency
to be high potency.
The other problem with
them is that they are not
transdermally liposomal.
They're not actually
produced in a way
that they don't cause
buildup in the body.
And so the lab that I use,
they are aware of all that.
And so they have a
special liposomal method
that they use where they
attach a phospholipid
to the active ingredient, and
it creates 100 layer lipid--
100 lipid layer which allows
it to get into the cell
membrane and into
the bloodstream.
It bypasses the digestive tract.
>>REGINA: So there no
toxicity, essentially.
>>THOMPSON: Right.
There's no buildup.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so you say
this is over-the-counter?
People can get these
over the counter?
>>THOMPSON: Right.
Well, you have to go
through a practitioner,
but it doesn't have to be
a medical prescription.
Well, I mean, it's not
a medical procedure.
>>REGINA: So what
kind of pharmacy
distributes these
or dispenses these?
>>THOMPSON: There is a lab
in Carlsbad, California.
>>REGINA: OK.
So you go through that lab?
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
And they actually
do the testing,
and then they actually custom
make the creams as well.
>>REGINA: So if a woman is
listening to this right now,
and she's out there
on her own, she's
done with allopathic
medicine-- maybe
she got burned by the
bioidentical thing
and wants to give it a
try and maybe doesn't even
have the funds to do the
full panels of testing
and everything.
What does she do?
>>THOMPSON: So the
first thing comes back
to the information I
gave to the teenage girl
in the beginning of our
conversation, which is
get the blood sugar imbalance.
Get rid of the wine every night.
It doesn't cut it.
Get rid of the chocolate.
And just do the due
diligence with diet.
Eat five small meals a day,
at least three proteins a day.
Drink half your body
weight in ounces in water.
If you're a 130-pound woman,
you drink about 2 quarts
of water a day.
And have physical activity.
Do something, whether
it be yoga or walking
or regular aerobic activity.
And do that which
brings you peace.
>>REGINA: And happiness
and genuine joy,
which has to do with
connectivity with others.
And that has to do
with oxytocin, right?
From the time we're born
through the hugging process
with other people, it produces
oxytocin, all of these things
that have to do with community.
And before we get to
oxytocin, OK, what about-- can
they go to-- can they
call this lab and say,
I'd like to have some
of those hormone creams?
Can they do that, or do you
have to have a practitioner,
as you said?
>>THOMPSON: They
could call the lab,
and the lab could probably
refer them to a practitioner.
>>REGINA: And then
the practitioner
could write up
something for them.
OK.
And it's not terribly expensive?
I'm just trying to look
at someone taking it
into their own hands.
How could they do
this effectively?
>>THOMPSON: I think
a cream is about $70.
>>REGINA: And how
long does that last?
>>THOMPSON: It depends,
because in the beginning,
it's usually a quarter of
a teaspoon, twice a day.
And that's about
a month's supply.
But like I said
before, the idea is
to strengthen the body so
you need less and less.
For instance, I've been on
creams for 13, 14 years.
And I'm still using the same
cream I had seven months ago
because I need less and less.
>>REGINA: Yes, very good point.
>>THOMPSON: So
yeah, at that point,
it's not expensive anymore.
I think most hormones
or brain chemical
programs are more
expensive in the beginning
because it's like a
front-loading thing.
You have to pay for
the practitioner.
You have to pay
for the lab costs.
And it is so worth it, though.
Oh, my gosh.
When I say--
>>REGINA: I agree.
I agree.
But some people are just
so tired of systems,
they don't want to
buy into anything.
They just want to take
care of themselves.
I'm asking on behalf
of any of our viewers
that are feeling
that way about it.
>>THOMPSON: I'm hip
because I tend to--
I tend to attract
maybe people like me--
>>REGINA: Yeah, and like me.
>>THOMPSON: --who
don't want systems.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>THOMPSON: And I get
that question a lot.
And so I will handle
that person in the way
they need to be handled,
which means that it's
a little bit more hands-off.
And I get to get them
to a maintenance point
more quickly, and
probably because they
don't need the hands-on that a
lot of the other people need.
>>REGINA: Right.
So we're looking at something
that is actually still pretty
affordable--
I mean, if we can
go down that route.
But I get you.
If you can get the nice
saliva panels going first,
that's a good thing.
I agree.
Let's talk about community and
now this last really healing
part of it all, which is
the notion of isolation
within society, people
feeling like they're
having to carry it all on
their own, men and women both,
and the production of
oxytocin and the need
for that kind of
connection with each other,
even into a spiritual level.
>>THOMPSON: Well, it's
definitely something
that we see a lot
now, that I see
in the different
types of, I would say,
esoteric testing that
I do in my practice
where I do certain types
of biofeedback testing
which are not medical,
clinical tests.
But certain things are
revealed in the testing that
shows that people are definitely
feeling separate and cut off.
And I hear people talking
about it all the time.
I mean, it's not any news.
But to me, I'll just
tell you what I do.
I utilize certain
homeopathics that
help with the oxytocin
production, which
have to do with the pituitary
gland and the hypothalamus
in the brain, these
glands that stimulate,
really, the whole cascade
of hormones in my body.
And sometimes, that will
just do it right there.
Because I think it's not
just a question of that
we are separated and isolated,
but it's that we feel that.
Because there's nothing wrong
with being alone, and there's
nothing wrong with not
being in community.
But it's just, how does
that make you feel?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>THOMPSON: Because some people
feel great being like that.
So those people
wouldn't be needing
the oxytocin is my point.
So if you can get a
cascade of hormones
going to help a person--
maybe they're actually
retreating, you know?
It may not just be that
they're victims, per se,
but maybe there is something
in their spiritual makeup
that is saying, hey, you need
to kick back a little bit,
get yourself centered and
healed, and then go back
and create a better community.
>>REGINA: Right, and
that makes perfect sense.
I mean, there's such a thing
as just being overly dependent
and having to need to be in
contact because it's your--
somehow your buoy in life.
I'm not saying that.
I'm not suggesting that.
More this kind of general
feeling of the burden
that life carries because
of all the stimuli,
the input, the responsibilities,
the bills going out
every month.
I mean, these are all
artificial constructs.
It's not part of
necessarily being a human.
And we are adapting,
but this whole notion
of needing each other
maybe a little more than we
give ourselves credit for also.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
And I think part of what occurs
is because there's so much--
so much overwhelm and so
much overuse of the brain,
that the brain chemistry
just sets itself up for that.
So in other words, you
can turn that around.
You can turn that around
by giving the nutrients
to the brain chemicals.
In other words,
there are certain
customized amino acid
powders, for instance,
that you can use for brain
chemical balancing that
could actually create
a different reality.
>>REGINA: So from
your point of view--
we only have a
minute or so left.
From your point of
view, really, there's
very little that most human
beings can't balance out
in the natural realm of--
as you say, whether it's
a natural amino acid powder,
whether it's food, whether it's
having fun, and whether
it's meditating and having
a spiritual practice, we
can balance ourselves out.
We do not have to turn our
power in this way over,
necessarily, to an industry.
>>THOMPSON: We need to.
We need to.
>>REGINA: We are on our own.
>>THOMPSON: We have to do it.
We have to do it.
>>REGINA: Final comment on that?
>>THOMPSON: We have to do it for
the whole world of epigenetics
and how we eat and how we
behave and how nourished we are
and how that turns
into gene expression
and how that gets passed
along to our children.
I mean, we need
to heal ourselves.
We need to-- I keep
saying due diligence,
but we need to do
our due diligence
to get our bodies balanced in
whatever way that is so that we
can create a beautiful future.
>>REGINA: Can't throw
Band-Aids at it anymore.
>>THOMPSON: No.
>>REGINA: It feels like the
time for throwing Band-Aids
and a pill at it is over.
>>THOMPSON: That's true.
>>REGINA: Pretty much.
>>REGINA: So if people want
to get hold of you, I'm sure--
you're a naturopath and
naturopathic endocrinologist,
which is a fairly rare
and very specified field.
But other than reaching
you, are there other people
that they might go to, whether
it's homeopothist or whatnot?
>>THOMPSON: Well, sure.
People should go to whoever
they-- you know, to--
>>REGINA: Homeopathy is a good
place to begin for one, right?
>>THOMPSON: Well,
I mean, whatever
appeals to the person
who's finding a person.
Homeopaths are not
necessarily going
to be hormone balancers, but
nothing wrong with homeopathy.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It might be a path to
balancing the brain chemicals,
for example.
I'm just saying,
there are many paths,
because not everybody can
end up on your doorstep.
>>THOMPSON: Yeah.
There are chiropractors.
There are acupuncturists.
There are herbalists.
>>REGINA: Very good.
Good.
I just thought I'd
toss that out there
because I know a
lot of people are
going to want to try to
connect with you after this.
And I really thank you
for your time, Laura.
And I hope this has offered
some deeper insights
into how our bodies handle
external and internal stress
where hormone
production is concerned.
And I know that all
roads keep leading back
to a life oriented
more toward peace.
If our external world is not
supporting a more peaceful
lifestyle, is what I'm
hearing you say, then perhaps
changes are in order
across the board.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]